---
layout: post
title:  "Observations on how antibodies evolve"
date:   2025-02-14 2:55:00
categories: [Papers]
---
A recent study on anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies retraces the steps they take during affinity maturation.

Antibodies evolve differently from most proteins. Instead of maintaining functions and/or interactions across different organisms, antibodies evolve specificity to targets of interest within organisms, in a Darwinian process called somatic hypermutation. During this process, they collect point mutations that increase their affinity to their target, with the end result being a slightly modified antibody sequence that binds with nanomolar or picomolar affinity and (usually) very high specificity.

[Kirby et al](doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2412787122) recently examined the evolutionary trajectories taken by fourteen high-affinity antibodies to see what the overall effect of each mutation was, relative to the germline precursor. Their results are quite interesting and are summarized as follows:
*   The mutations obtained during affinity maturation can be obtained in any order, arguing that epistasis is not a problem.
*   Most mutations (47 out of 51) are the result of single-nucleotide changes, suggesting that the DNA sequence of the germline introduces a hard constraint on the accessible evolutionary space.
*   Germline precursors to high-affinity antibodies already bind with nanomolar affinity, and most mutations obtained during affinity maturation don't actually improve on this
*   More evolutionary "steps" are required for germline antibodies to evolve to broadly neutralizing antibodies that can bind to many different variants of SARS-CoV-2

Incidentally, this is the first time I used an LLM to find a paper - I asked Gemini to find a citation for the claim that germline antibodies can already have nanomolar binding affinity to their targets, and it replied with this paper.

1. Kirby et al. ["Retrospective SARS-CoV-2 human antibody development trajectories are largely sparse and permissive"](doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2412787122) PNAS 2025