---
layout: post
title:  "What's missing from advice about scientific note-taking"
date:   2025-02-22 2:25:00
categories: [Metanotes]
---
The book ["Digital Zettelkasten: Principles, Methods, & Examples" by David Kadavy](https://bookshop.org/p/books/digital-zettelkasten-principles-methods-examples-david-kadavy/17166162) walks through note-taking schemes for nonfiction writers, including scientists and academics. Missing from the book is any discussion of the huge advantages his systems has on the ultimate scientific time sink.

I'm talking about making PowerPoint slides.

Probably I'll elaborate about this in another post in the future with more details. But Kadavy talks about a process for notetaking, in which ideas are digested and organized, as though it ultimate ends up in a book or scientific paper. In contrast, and this was the case throughout graduate school and in pharma since, the destination for most of my knowledge has been in slideshows prepared in Microsoft Powerpoint. It's true that the retrieval of figures and attempts to remember who said what when assembling slides for lab meetings/conferences/seminars solidifies the line of reasoning and storytelling surrounding a project. However, once that's in place, making powerpoint slides becomes a huge pain in the ass that can be mostly avoided with better organization and knowledge management.

And I'm willing to bet that, in contrast with writing, which is understood to take some time, most people understand that the assembly of PowerPoint slides is often a waste of time. The trouble is that we think of paper-writing as inherently time-consuming because it includes the type of digesting Kadavy suggests should instead happen during note-taking. This makes his central thesis that notetaking systems make you more productive, which is supported by anecdotal evidence, difficult to believe and likely to be lumped into the same basket of ideas as other garbage in the self-help aisle.

Anyways, since grad school I've adopted many of the ideas proposed (but not invented) by Kadavy. Namely, atomization of knowledge into individual notes that are linked to one another to facilitate organic rediscovery. An idea gets its own note. An experimental result gets its own note. An ongoing controversy gets its own note. In effect, each note is like a micro-review on an extremely specific subject. You can find the system I maintain [here](https://publish.obsidian.md/ddelalamo/Sorted_notes/Protein+structural+modeling+and+design+Zettelkasten) and detailed examples of these kinds of notes [here](https://publish.obsidian.md/ddelalamo/Sorted_notes/Public/Protein_design/Not+all+sequences+with+improved+activity+have+plausible+evolutionary+paths+via+stepwise+introduction+of+mutations) and [here](https://publish.obsidian.md/ddelalamo/Sorted_notes/Public/Protein_design/Protein+property+prediction+using+PLMs+does+not+benefit+from+scale+except+when+predicting+structural+features). By far the biggest time savings came in how effortlessly it made the assembly of huge amounts of relevant information for PowerPoint. It's an incredibly unsexy application of this method for organizing knowledge, but we take for granted how much we can learn from a well-polished presentation, and thus owe it to ourselves to do as much as we can to make our talks as effective as possible.